The Project Gutenberg EBook of Yntemoca yntlacamecayo, yn tlahtoque yn
teteuhctin yn ompa tlaca ypan altepetl culhuacan yhuan nican tlahtoque teteuhctin yn ipan in tlaca huey altepetl mexico tenochtitlan, by Domingo Francisco de San Antón Muñón Chimalpahin Cuauhtlehuanitzin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Yntemoca yntlacamecayo, yn tlahtoque yn teteuhctin yn ompa tlaca ypan altepetl culhuacan yhuan nican tlahtoque teteuhctin yn ipan in tlaca huey altepetl mexico tenochtitlan
       Oquitlallitiaque yn tlahtoque teteuhctin culhuacan

Author: Domingo Francisco de San Antón Muñón Chimalpahin Cuauhtlehuanitzin

Release Date: June 11, 2007 [EBook #21802]

Language: Nahuatl

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YNTEMOCA YNTLACAMECAYO ***




Produced by Anonymous





[Transcriber's Note: In this ASCII version, abbreviations have been
expanded, c-with-cedilla has been replaced with z, and n-with-tilde
has been replaced with n~. An English translation is available in
Codex Chimalpahin, volume 2, ISBN 0-8061-2950-6.]

La decendencia y generacion de los Reyes, y Sen~ores y naturales del
pueblo de culhuacan y tambien de aqui de los Reyes y Sen~ores.
naturales en esta gran ciudad de mexico tenochtitlan. compuesto por
los Sen~ores. de culhuacan.

Yntemoca yntlacamecayo, yn tlahtoque yn teteuhctin yn ompa tlaca ypan
altepetl culhuacan yhuan nican tlahtoque teteuhctin yn ipan in tlaca
huey altepetl mexico tenochtitlan, Oquitlallitiaque yn tlahtoque
teteuhctin culhuacan

.x. tochtli xihuitl. 670. an~os, ypan inyn acico yn motlallico. yn
oncan culhuacan yn huehuetque chichimeca culhuaque ye ynpan acico ye
cate yn xochmilca yn oncan calli xochmilco

ix. acatl xihuitl 695. an~os. ypan inyn tlacat yn tepiltzin yn itoca
Nauhyotzin ye iuh cenpohualli onchiquacen xihuitl cate yn culhuaque yn
oncan culhuacan

[Left margin: .1. huehue nauhyotzin Rey.] v. calli xihuitl. 717.
an~os. ypan inyn motlahtocatlalli yn tepiltzin yn itoca huehue
Nauhyotzin tlahtohuani achto culhuacan ye hualconpehualti yn
tlahtocayotl ye iuh cenpohualli omeyxiuhtia y nauhyotzin yn
motlahtocatlallico. auh ye iuh nepa onpohualli onchicuexihuitl cate yn
oncan culhuacan yn huehuetque chichimeca culhuaque

[Left margin: .2. huehue nonoalcatl Rey.] iij. acatl xihuitl 767.
an~os. ypan in momiquillico, yn tlacatl yn tepiltzin yn itoca huehue
Nauhyotzin tlahtohuani catca achto culhuacan yn tlahtocat Onpohualli
onmatlactli ypan ce xihuitl, // Auh za niman ipan inyn omoteneuh
xihuitl yn motlahtocatlali yn tlacatl yn huehue nonohualcatl
tlahtohuani culhuacan

[Left margin: .3. huehue yohuallatonac Rey.] iij. calli xihuitl 845.
an~os. ypan in momiquillico yn itoca huehue nonohualcatl tlahtohuani
catca culhuacan yn tlahtocat yepohualli oncaxtolli ypan nauhxihuitl.
// Auh zan niman ipan inyn omoteneuh xihuitl yn motlahtocatlalli yn
itoca huehue yohuallatonac tlahtohuani culhuacan

[Left margin: .4. Quetzallacxoyatzin Rey.] x. tecpatl xihuitl 904.
an~os. ypan inyn momiquillico tlacatl huehue yohuallatonac tlahtohuani
catca culhuacan yn tlahtocat yepohualxihuitl, auh za niman ipan inyn
omoteneuh xihuitl yn motlahtocatlalli yn tlacatl yn itoca
quetzallacxoyatzin tlahtohuani culhuacan

[Left margin: .5. huehue chalchiuhtlatonac Rey.] vij. calli xihuitl
953. an~os. ypan inyn momiquillico yn tlacatl quetzallacxoyatzin
tlahtohuani catca culhuacan yn tlahtocat, ompohualli onmatlactli
xihuitl, auh zan niman ipan inyn omoteneuh xihuitl yn motlahtocatlalli
yn tlacatl yn itoca huehue chalchiuhtlahtonac tlahtohuani culhuacan

[Left margin: .6. Totepeuh Rey.] xiij. calli xihuitl. 985. an~os. ypan
inyn momiquillico yn tlacatl huehue chalchiuhtlahtonac tlahtohuani
catca culhuacan yn tlahtocat. cenpohualli onmatlactli ypan yexihuitl.
auh zan niman ipan inyn omoteneuh xihuitl yn motlahtocatlalli yn
tlacatl yn itoca totepeuh tlahtohuani culhuacan

viij. calli xihuitl, 993. an~os. ypan in motlahtocatlalli yn itoca
hueymac tlahtohuani huey tullam quin yehuatl in ompa conpehualtito yn
tlahtocayotl, ayatle catca ynin ypiltzin yn totepeuh tlahtohuani
culhuacan auh yn tetlahtocatlallito ytoca nauhyotzin yhuan yn itoca
opochtli ynin pipiltin culhuacan

x. acatl xihuitl 995. an~os. ypan inyn oncan azcapotzalco yn
motlallico yn acico yn huehuetque chichimeca in ye motenehua
azcapotzalca yn quinhualpachotia ytoca huitzillihuitl yn chichimecatl.
iuh quihualtlahtocapouhtia yehuatl quinpixotehuac iuhquima
ynquauhtzonyo in ye cuel teyxhuihuan yn huehue tezozomoctli
tlahtohuani azcapotzalco, auh yehuatl ynelhuayo y nohuian tlahtoque

[Left margin: .7. yc ome nauhyotzin Rey.] 2. tochtli xihuitl. 1026.
an~os. ypan in momiquillico yn tlacatl yn totepeuh tlahtohuani catca
culhuacan yn tlahtocat onpohualxihuitl ypan ome xihuitl. auh zan niman
ipan inyn omoteneuh xihuitl yn motlahtocatlalli ynic ome ytoca
nauhyotzin tlahtohuani culhuacan

[Left margin: .8. Quauhtexpetlatzin Rey.] ix. tecpatl xihuitl. 1072.
an~os. ypan in omomiquillico yn tlacatl ynic ome nauhyotzin tlahtohuani
catca culhuacan yn tlahtocat, onpohualli onchicome xihuitl, auh zan
niman ipan inyn omoteneuh xihuitl yn motlahtocatlalli yn itoca
quauhtexpetlatzin tlahtohuani culhuacan

j. calli xihuitl. 1129. an~os. ypan in momiquillico yn tlacatl
quauhtexpetlatzin tlahtohuani catca culhuacan yn tlahtocat, onpohualli
oncaxtolli ypan yexihuitl auh ce xihuitl yn ayac tlahtocat.

[Left margin: .9. huetzin Rey.] 2. tochtli xihuitl 1130 an~os. ypan
in motlahtocatlalli yn tlacatl yn itoca huetzin tlahtohuani culhuacan
yhuan ynic ome ytoca nonohualcatl yteuhctlahtocauh mochiuh yn
culhuacan

ix. tochtli xihuitl. 1150. an~os ypan in momiquillico yn tlacatl
huetzin tlahtohuani catca culhuacan yn tlahtocat cenpohualli ypan ce
xihuitl auh tlacoxihuitl yn oncactimanca

[Left margin: .10. veve achitometl Rey.] x. calli xihuitl 1151. an~os.
ypan in motlahtocatlalli yn tlacatl yn itoca huehue achitomecatl
tlahtohuani culhuacan

iiij. acatl xihuitl, 1171. an~os ypan in momiquillico yn tlacatl
huehue achitomecatl tlahtohuani catca culhuacan yn tlahtocat,
cenpohualxihuitl once auh tlacoxihuitl yn oncactimanca

[Left margin: .11. Quauhtlahtonac Rey.] v. tecpatl xihuitl, 1172.
an~os. ypan in motlahtocatlalli yn tlacatl yn itoca quauhtlahtonac
tlahtohuani culhuacan

v. calli xihuitl. 1185. an~os. ypan in momiquillico yn tlacatl
quauhtlahtonac tlahtohuani catca culhuacan yn tlahtocat matlactli
onnahui xihuitl auh tlacoxihuitl yn cactimanca

[Left margin: .12. mallatzin Rey.] vi. tochtli xihuitl. 1186. an~os.
ypan in motlahtocatlalli yn tlacatl yn itoca Mallatzin tlahtohuani
culhuacan

vij. tecpatl xihuitl. 1200. an~os. ypan in momiquillico yn tlacatl
mallatzin tlahtohuani catca culhuacan yn tlahtocat, caxtolxihuitl, auh
niman yn cactimanca yn quauhtlahtolloc culhuacan yn ayac tlahtocat
cenpohualli oncaxtolli xihuitl

[Left margin: .13. chalchiuhtlatonac segundo Rey.] iiij. tecpatl
xihuitl, 1236. an~os. ye quin ipan inyn motlahtocatlallico yn tlacatl
ynic ome ytoca chalchiuhtlatonac tlahtohuani culhuacan auh ye omito yn
zan quauhtlahtolloc cenpohualli oncaxtolli xihuitl

[Left margin: .14. Quauhtlix Rey.] xiij. calli xihuitl 1245. an~os.
ypan in momiquillico yn tlacatl ynic ome chalchiuhtlatonac tlahtohuani
culhuacan catca yn tlahtocat, matlacxihuitl auh zan niman ipan inyn
omoteneuh xihuitl yn motlahtocatlalli yn tlacatl yn itoca quauhtlix
tlahtohuani culhuacan

[Left margin: .15. yohuallatonac Rey.] vij. tecpatl xihuitl. 1252.
an~os. ypan in momiquillico yn tlacatl quauhtlix tlahtohuani catca
culhuacan yn tlahtocat, chicuexihuitl, auh zan niman ipan inyn
omoteneuh xihuitl yn motlahtocatlalli yn tlacatl ynic ome ytoca
yohuallatonac tlahtohuani culhuacan

j. acatl xihuitl 1259. ypan in omomiquillico yn tlacatl ynic ome
yohuallatonac tlahtohuani catca culhuacan yn tlahtocat, chicuexihuitl,
auh zan tlacoxihuitl yn oncactimanca.

[Left margin: .16. tziuhtetl Rey.] 2. tecpatl xihuitl, 1260. an~os.
ypan in motlahtocatlalli yn tlacatl yn itoca tziuhtetl tlahtohuani
culhuacan

[Left margin: .17. xihuitl temoc Rey.] xj. calli xihuitl. 1269. an~os.
ypan in momiquillico yn tlacatl tziuhtetl tlahtohuani catca culhuacan
yn tlahtocat matlacxihuitl, auh zan niman ipan inyn omoteneuh xihuitl
yn motlahtocatlalli yn tlacatl yn xihhuitl temoc tlahtohuani culhuacan

Auh nican ca ytlahtollo yn itemoca yn itlacamecayo yn tlacatl huehue
huitzillihuitl achto tlahtohuani mochiuhca yn intlan teochichimeca
mexitin yn otlipan yn oncan chapoltepec yn ayemo nican tenochtitlan yn
oquic innenemillizpan ynic huallatiaque yn oquic hualmotlatlallitiaque
ynic yecoque yn ixquichtin yn izqui tlayacatl yn huehuetque yn azteca
mexitin teoculhuaque chicomoztoca

Auh ynic nohuian hualnentiaque yn mexica huehuetque teochichimeca ynic
ompa hualquizque huallehuaque aztlan teoculhuacan ynic huallollinque
yhuan ynic oncan quizaco quinehuayan chicomoztoc yn huehuetque auh
niman oncan acico yn itocayocan tzonpanco auh yn iquac oncan acico in
yehuantin huehuetque azteca mexitin yquac oncan tlahtocati yehuatl
chane yn itoca tlahuizcalpotonqui teuhctli cenca quintlazotlaque yn
oncan mexica quinnamictiaya yn comitl yn caxitl, oncan motlallico yn
mexica oncan nauhxiuhtique yn mocehuique

Auh oc cequintin huehuetque quitotihui yn iquac acico tzonpanco mexica
yquac ompa tlahtocati yn xaltocan yn itoca tlahuizcalteuhctli
tlahtohuani auh oncatca ce ypiltzin ytoca Ompanteuhctli. auh in
yehuantin inyn tlahuizcalteuhctli mochi yc ompa aciticatca yn intlal
yn inquaxoch yn tzonpanco auh yn ipiltzin yn itoca onpanteuhctli,
niman ye quitohua ye quilhuia yn ittatzin yn tlahtohuani
tlahuizcalteuhctli quilhui notecuiyohe tlahthoaunie ma
xinechmocahuilli ma niquimitta aquique ynin ye cate totlalpan niman
quihto yn tlahtohuani tlahuizcalteuhctli ca ye qualli tla xiauh tla
xiquimitta aquique yn oncan omotlallico, niman onya yn tzonpanco, yn
tlahtocapilli ompanteuhctli niman ye yntlan nemi yn mexica cexiuhti
yntlan auh niman ye mononotza in mexica ye quihtohua aquin totlan nemi
motollinia mexica ye ma ce xicmacacan yn amochpoch yn ompanteuhctli yc
niman quimacaque ce yn imichpoch mexica, auh niman ye mopilhuatia
oncan ye tlacati ynic ce cihuatzintli ytoca chimallaxotzin, ynic ome
[struck out: ytoca] ya yehuatl yn itoca huehue huitzillihuitl, yniquey
ytoca tozpanxotzin ynin cihuatzintli xocoyotl yqu imeyxtin ypilhuan yn
ompateuhctli

Auh yn achto otiquinteneuhque huehuetque yn iuh quitotihui yn iquac
oncan acico tzompanco yn mexica ye omito oncan nauhxiuhtique auh yn
iquac onca tzonpanco huellehuaque yn huallolinque mexica quin iquac
quinhualmacac quilmach ye ce ychpoch yn tlatohuani tzonpanco yn
tlahuicalpotonqui teuhctli niman yaque tizayocan yn mexica quihuicaque
yn ichpoch tlahuizcalpotonqui teuhctli yehuatl quichiuh yn huehue
huitzillihuitl, o yhui ynyn quimaxallotihui tlahtolli yn huehuetque.
auh macihui yn omoteneuh occan tlahtolli yn maxaliuhtica yece necoc
campa quineltilitihui yn huehuetque ca yxhuiuhtzin yn
tlahuizcalteuhctli tlahtohuani yn huehue huitzillihuitl, yn azo
cihuayotica yn anozo oquichotica yn yezo ytlapallo,

Auh ynic ompa tzonpanco huallehuaque yn huallolinque mexica auh yn
itoca tozcuecuextli yehuatl hualquauhtlahtotia yn intlan mexica
yehuatl quinhualyacan ynin quin otlica tlacat auh onpohualxihuitl ynic
teyacan yn quauhtlato oncan quilpillique yn ixiuh yn tecpayocan ynic
hualyatiaque mexica auh yn onmic tozcuecuextli, niman ye mononotza yn
mexica ypan yn huehue huitzillihuitl ynic quitlahtocatlallizque auh
niman huallaque oncan motlallico yn mexica yn itocayocan amalinalpan
yn azcapotzalco oncan quezquixiuhtique

j. tecpatl xihuitl, 1272. an~os. ypan inyn omononotzque mexica
chichimeca huehuetque niman ye contlahtocatlallia yn huehue
huitzillihuitl ynin huell achto yntlahtocauh mochiuh yn mexica ynic
ompa huallaque aztlan ynin quitlahtocatlallique za ye oc oncan yn
amallinalpan azcapotzalco, auh zan ye ypan inyn omoteneuh xihuitl. j.
tecpatl, niman huallaque yn oncan chapoltepec ynahuac yn itocayocan
techcantitlan oncan nauhxiuhtique yn mexica yn motlallique oncan
nauhxihuitl tlahtocat yn huehue huitzillihuitl

2. calli xihuitl 1273. an~os. ypan inyn huel mellahuac ynic oncan
motlallico mexica yn techcantitlan yn inahuac chapoltepec ynic ompa
huallehuaque amallinalpan azcapotzalco, auh oncan in nauhxiuhtique yn
mexica

v. tecpatl xihuitl 1276. an~os. ypan in oncan nauhxiuhtique yn
techcantitlan yn mexica auh zan ye ypan inyn omoteneuh xihuitl yn
oncan hualmiquanique atlacuihuayan mexican oncan Motlallico oc no
nauhxiuhtique oncan ye ynpan acico yn oncan chaneque zan no chichimeca
oquinmocniuhtitacico yn mexica oncan oquicuitacico yn atlatl auh yn
quitemacac yn atlatl ytoca xohuitzil quinmacac yn mexica chichimeca
auh ynin mexica yn iquac oacico ynpan in yehuantin oc centlamantin
oncan yeppa chanonoque quin yehuantin yn mexica oquintocayotitacico
atlatl cuihuayancalque ypampa yn oncan quicuitacico ye omoteneuh yn
atlatl oncan nauhxihuitl tlahtocat yn huehue huitzillihuitl
chichimecatl

ix. tecpatl xihuitl 1280. an~os. ypan inyn ic onmiquanique
chapoltepec yn mexica azteca oncan onehuaque yn atlacuihuayan zan ye
oc yehuatl yntlahtocauh mochiuhtihuitz yn mexica yn huehue
huitzillihuitl chichimecatl ye quin ye iuh nepa chicuexihuitl
motlahtocatlalli ynic oncan motlallico chapoltepec auh yc oncan
cenpohualxiuhtique yn catca mexica yn chapoltepec

[Left margin: .18. coxcoxtli Rey.] x. calli xihuitl. 1281. an~os.
ypan in momiquillico yn tlacatl yn xihuitl temoc tlahtohuani catca
culhuacan yn ipiltzin acxoquauhtli yn tlahtocat matlactli omey
xihuitl. // auh zan niman ipan inyn omoteneuh xihuitl yn
motlahtocatlalli yn tlacatl yn itoca coxcoxtli tlahtohuani culhuacan
yn iquac yn ye quin ye nepa ce xihuitl oncan cate chapoltepec yn
mexica, auh yn amaquemeque chichimeca yn atonaltzin chichimeca
teuhctli. yhuan tliltecatzin chichimeca yaotequihua, yhuan yn tlacatl
quahuitzatzin tlayllotlac teuhctli, tlahtoque, ye quin oiuh ye
matlactli omey xihuitl cate nepa yn icpac tepetl Amaqueme ynic acico
yn omoteneuhque tlahtoque chichimeca yn iquac onmotlahtocatlalli
coxcoxtli, auh ynin tlahtohuani coxcoxtli yeyntin quinchiuh ypilhuan
ynic ce ytoca huehue tezozomoctli eleltzin, ynic ome ytoca huehue
acampichtli yniquey cihuatzintli amo huel momati yn itoca // Auh yn
huehue tezozomoctli helleltzin ce ychpochtzin quichiuh yn oncan
culhuacan yece amo huel momati yn itoca cihuapilli ynin
quihuallitlanique yn tenanca atlauhteca chalca yn intlahtocauh yn
itoca ylloncueytl atlauhtecatl teuhctli quimocihuauhti ompa tlahcatito
yntech quiz ynic ome ytoca ytzquauhtzin atlauhtecatl teuhctli
teyxhuiuh oncan culhuacan

vj. tochtli xihuitl. 1290. an~os. ypan in quicauh yn itlahtocayo yn
illoncueytl atlauhtecatl teuhctli, tlahtohuani catca atenco tenanco
atlauhtlan chalco, Ynin ypiltzin yn huehue ytzquauhtzin atlauhtecatl
teuhctli, auh yn itech catca tlahtocayotl yn oncan atenco chalco
caxtolli omey xihuitl, auh ypan inyn omoteneuh yn vj. tochtli xihuitl,
yquac quimixiptlahti yn illoncueytl quicahuilli yn itlahtocayo yn
ipiltzin ynic ome ytoca ytzquauhtzin atlauhtecatl teuhctli mochiuh
ynin piltontli yn iquac macoctlahtocayotl ynin ye cuel yccaton yn
tlacatl coxcoxtli tlahtohuani culhuacan, auh zan ye ypan inyn
omoteneuh yn chiquacen tochtli xihuitl ynic oncan onehuac atenco chalco
yn piltontli yn itzquauhtzin atlauhtecatl teuhctli ynic ya ynic
motlallito yn ompa amaquemecan yn
toltecatzaqualti[struck out: tlan]tenanco [struck out: atlauh]tlan
ompa tlahtocatito ynic ompa onmiquanique tenanca atlauhteca yn ipan in
omoteneuh xihuitl ompa ypan acito yn intlalmaceuhcauh yn tlacatl yn
itoca quahuitzatzin tlayllotlac teuhctli huel yehuatl
yntlahtocatachcauh yn tenanca chalca auh zan no ypan inyn xihuitl
omoteneuh yn tlahtohuani ylloncueytl atlauhtecatl teuhctli ompa ya yn
cohuatl ichan yn aculhuacan yc cenya / auh yn iquac ypan in ye quin ye
matlacxihuitl tlahtocati yn tlacatl coxcoxtli yn oncan culhuacan / Auh
ye matlactli once xihuitl oncan cate chapoltepec yn huehuetque mexica
chichimeca ye iuh caxtolli onnahui [superscript: xivitl] quinpachohua
yn tlahtocauh yn huehue huitzillihuitl, chichimecatl yn iquac ypan in
omoteneuh xihuitl,

2. acatl xihuitl. 1299. an~os. ypan in toxiuhmolpilli, auh ypan inyn
omoteneuh yn. 2. acatl xihuitl ynic oncan cenpohualxiuhtique
chapoltepec ynic oncan cate yn mexica chichimeca auh ye tlacoxiuhtica
yn ipan in omoteneuh. 2. acatl xihuitl, yn onmiquanique mexica yn oncan
ytocayocan yn acucolco, oncan quinyaotlatalhuique oncan
yaoyahualloloque yn mexica huehuetque zan ic mocemitohua chapoltepec
oncan quinyaoyahualloque ynic nahualpolliuhque yn mexica ynchimal
tlacuecuepaltica yn nahuapoliuhque auh in yehuantin mexica yn oquic
ayemo quimatia in tleyn ninpan ye chihualloz otetlatlanique achtopa in
ye tlachia in ye teytta, oneyaochichihualloc in mexica ye tetlatlania
oquintlatlanique yn ixquichtin yn cenhueytlalhuacque yn tepaneca yhuan
yn xaltocameca [struck out: yn quinnanquillique] oquimilhuique campa
anmohuica yn amochintin ohuanmoyaochichiuhque niman yc
oquinnanquillique oquitoque yn ixquichtin tepaneca yhuan yn
xaltocameca ca ompa tihui tiyaoquizazque yn xochmilco, ancazo ye
oncontlalli ytlahtol yn azcapotzalco tlaca yn xochmilco. yhuan
culhuacan yhuan yn xaltocan yn ca mocentlallique yn ca mononotzque yn
mexica chichimeca ynic quinnahualpollozque yn iuh niman ynpan
quichiuhque mexica, niman oncan yaoyahualloque yn acucolco oncan
chimaltlacuecuepaltica nahualpolliuhque yn huehuetque mexica oncan
temac tlanque ynic nauhcampa ohuicalloque yn mexica ynic quinpeuhque
auh yn oncan omoteneuh yn acucolco, oncan ynpan motlalli yn mexica
huehuetque ynic quilpillizquia yn inxiuh, auh ayemo huel quilpillique
yn inxiuh yn oncan acucolco ypampa yn yaoyotl oncan ynpan mochiuh, auh
yhuan yn oncan omoteneuh yn acucolco oncan quimoquentique yn mexica yn
quitocayotia amoxtli, auh ynic oncan quinyaoyahualloque mexica yn
acucolco ye omtio, yehuantin yntlachichihual mochiuh yn tepaneca yhuan
culhuaque yhuan yn xochmilca yhuan xaltocameca yn quinnamicque mexica
chichimeca yn oncan chapoltepec ynic pehualloque ynic mitohua oncan
nahualpoliuhque yn acucolco, oncan qui macique oncan quimonehualtique
yn quinhuicaque [struck out: yn quinhuicaque] culhuacan yn tlahtohuani
huehue huitzillihuitl chichimecatl, yn achto yntlahtocauh catca mexica
ynehuan huicoque yn ichpoch ytoca azcatl xochtzin yhuan oc ce
cihuatzintli yn huicoc ytoca tzihuacxotzin, yhuan yn ihueltiuh
huitzillihuitl yn itoca chimallaxotzin, yqu in nahuixtin huicoque yn
culhuacan auh yn oc ce yteyccauh huitzillihuitl, huicoc xaltocan yn
itoca tozpanxotzin ynin cihuapilli amo mic zan quiquixtique, auh yn
oqu ixquich yntlapal quichiuhque yn amo huel temac huetzque huehuetque
mexica yn tlayxnamicque yaoyotica yn oncan yn acucolco chapoltepec
nahuintin ynic ce ytoca tzihuactli, ynic ome ytoca ce acatzin, yinquey
ytoca huitzin ynic nahui ytoca contzin,

auh yn omotocateneuhque yn huehue huitzillihuitl yn ihuan ychpoch yn
azcatl xochtzin yn ihuan yhueltihuatzin chimallaxotzin yn ihuan oc ce
cihuatzintli yn iquin nahuixtin yn acucolco oncan quimonehualtique yn
quinhuicaque ompa culhuacan zan pepetlauhtiaque zan nima ayoc tle
yntech huetztia yntlahquen auh yehuatl yxpan quinhuicaque yn
tlahtohuani coxcoxtli yxpan quinquetzato ynic quimittaz yn
omalchihualloc huahue huitzillihuitl yhuan yn oc cequintin
cihuatzitzinti, auh yn oquic ayemo quimonaxitiaya yxpan coxcoxtli,
niman conilhuito ohuanoc yn huitzillihuitl yn intlahtocauh mexica yn
oquicac niman quihto yn coxcoxtli ca ye qualli ma yciuhca
xoconmictitihuetzican yntla oquimonaxitico

Auh in yehuatl yn huehue huitzillihuitl ynic quinhuicaque yn ichpoch
cenca quitlaocoltia yn atle ma ytlatzin ytech huetztia quilhuitacic yn
tlahtohuani coxcoxtli yn huitzillihuitl tlahtohuanie ma ytlahtzin
xicmotlaocollili y nochpochtzin, auh niman quinanquilli quilhui camo
nicia zan iuh yaz. yn mochpoch auh yn oquimonittac, yn tlahtohuani
coxcoxtli yn huitzillihuitl, yn ihuan ychpoch yn ihuan yhueltihuatzin
chimallaxotzin yhuan tzihuacxotzin yc niman yxpan yn intlacatecollouh
in diablo yn quimoteotiaya culhuaque yn quimonmictique yn huehue
huitzillihuitl yhuan yn oc cequintin omoteneuhque cihuatzitzinti auh
yn ixquichcauh tlahtocat huehue huitzillihuitl cenpohualli onchicuey
xihuitl, oiuhqui yn ynic nahualpolliuhque ynic chimaltlacuecuepaltica
polliuhque yn azteca mexitin chichimeca huehuetque ynic quiytztinenque
ynic quimaceuhque tlalli,

Auh oc cequintin huehuetque yn iuh quitotihui yn iuh
qui[struck out: mic]mictique huehue huitzillihuitl quihto yn
tlahtohuani coxcoxtli quinahuati ynic ome ytoca achitometl yhuan yn oc
cequintin pipiltin culhuaque quimilhui ynin tla xoconmictiti yn
huitzillihuitl, ma ompa tlamapan oztoc yn huixachtecatl ymapan
xoconmictiti, yn tachitometl ca totlacauh auh yn oconmictito
conilhuito yn coxcoxtli niccauhtzine ca otoconmictito yn
huitzillihuitl, ca ye qualli quihto yn coxcoxtli ca yc ticpopollohua
yn huitzillihuitl cayocaque ytlaquillohuan yezque, yn iquac ypan in
mictilloc huitzillihuitl, ye iuh nepa caxtolli omey xihuitl tlahtocati
yn coxcoxtli tlahtohuani culhuacan

Auh zan ya yehuatl niman ipan inyn omoteneuh yn 2. acatl xihuitl 1299.
an~os. in ye oiuh huicoque huehue huitzillihuitl, yhuan yn oc
cequintin yn culhuacan quinmictito

[A page or more is missing here.]

Ynic ce ytoca macuilxochitzin ynic ome cihuatl ynin cihuapilli amo
momati yn itoca. quihuallitlan quimocihuahuati yn quauhpopocatzin
tlahtohuani coyohuacan yehuantin oquinchiuhque oncan otlacatque
omentin ynpilhuan ynic ce ytoca Don hernando ce tochtzin tlahtohuani
catca cuyohuacan auh ynin vmpa momiquillito yn huey mollan yn ihquac
vmpa quinhuicaya mochintin tlahtoque yn Marques del valle.

Auh ynic ome ypilhuan quauhpopocatzin ytoca Don Juan de guzman
ytztollinqui ynin yehuatl oquitlamiltico oytech tzonquizaco yn
tlahtocayotl cuyohuacan. auh ynin tlahtohuani Don Juan ytztollinqui yn
quexquichtin ytech oquizque ypilhuan tel tlacpac ye teneuhticate
mochintin, auh zan yehuatl nican toconnextia yn iuh nican mexico
tlacamecayoticate. yn tlahtocatlacamecayotica

Auh yn oc ce omotocateneuh yn ipiltzin acamapichtli tlahtohuani
tenochtitlan. yn itoca ytzcohuatzin. ynin zan no tlahtohuani
tenochtitlan. ynin quichiuh ce ypiltzin ytoca Tezozomoctli. ynin
tlahtocapilli. quin icel yuhqui ytoca mochiuh ynin tocaytl yn nican
tenochtitlan. auh ynin omotocateneuh tezozomoctli. ayc otlahtocat. yn
tenochtitlan zan tlazopilli catca. auh yehuatl [superscript:
oquinchiuhtia] yn eyntin tlahtoque. tenochtitlan. ynic ce ytoca
tizocic. ynic omeytoca Ahuitzotl. yniquey ytoca Axayaca ynin za
xocoyotl. auh ye achto yn otlahtocat. auh zate yn otlahtocatque yn
omotocateneuhque ytiachcahuan yn tizocic yhuan Ahuitzotl.

Auh yn omotocateneuh tlahtohuani Axayacatzin oquinchiuh omentin
ypilhuan ynic ce ytoca Moteuhczoma xocoyotl. huey tlahtohuani ypan
acico yn espan~olesme ynin yehuatl quinnamic ynic ome ypilhuan
axayacatzin ytoca cuetlahuatzin achtopa tlahtohuani catca yn ompa
ytztapallapan auh zatepan zan nauhpohualilhuitl yn ontlahtocatico
nican tenochtitlan yn oyuh momiquilli ytiachcauhtzin Moteuhczomatzin
xocoyotl.

Auh yn omotocateneuh Ahuitzotzin tlahtohuani tenochtitlan. yn conitlan
yn quimocihuahuati tlatilolco cihuapilli ytoca tecapantzin ynin
ychpochtzin yn epcohuatzin tlahtocapilli tlatilolco. auh yn
ahuitzotzin yn inehuan tecapantzin yehuantin in oquichiuhque oncan
otlacat zan icel yn quauhtimoctzin tlahtohuani tenochtitlan yhuan
tlatilolco. ynin yehuatl yn quilpique espan~olesme. yn ihquac poliuh
mexicayotl tenochcayotl. yn ipan ylhuitzin S. tipolito. martyr. yn
ipan yc 13. agosto. de 1521. an~os. auh zatepan ompan momiquillito. yn
huey mollan ompa quinpilloque yehuan yn Don Pedro tetlepanquetzatzin
tlahtohuani tlacopan yehuatl ompan quintlatzontequilli yn Don fernando
cortes marques del valle Ytztlacatlahtoltica. yquac mochintin in vmpa
quinhuicac yn tlahtoque. ynin tlahtolli ytech tlaquixtilli yn bintula
quimocahuilitiuh Don Alonso ximenez culhuacan chane Auh yz izquintin
vmpa otlahtocatque culhuacan nican tocateneuhticaticate ynic ce

Ynic ce ytoca achitometl

Ynic ome ytoca acxoquauhtli

Yniquey ytoca coxcoxtli

Ynic nahui ytoca huehue acamapichtli

Ynic macuilli ytoca xihuitl temoc

Ynic chiquacen ytoca acamapichtli. achto tlahtohuani mochiuh yn
tenochtitlan--

Ynic chicome ytoca nauhyotl teuhctlamacazqui. ynin yehuatl
quitlanillito yn mexica chichimeca yn acamapichtli ynic otlahtocatico
tenochtitlan. yehuatl quihualmacauh. quihuallihua ynic quihualhuicac
yllancueytl cihuaplli

Ynic chicuey ytoca Acaltzin--

ynic 9. ytoca xilomantzin ynin ytech hualcotontica yn tlacamecayotl
culhuacan

ynic 10. ytoca tlahtolcaltzin ynin oc ceppa ytech onpeuh yehuatl y
tlacamecayotl culhuacan

ynic ii. ytoca tezozomoctli ynin yehuatl yn ipan acico espan~olesme

ynic 12. ytoca pitzotzin

ynic 13. ytoca Don diego tizaatzin moteuhczoma

ynic 14. ytoca Don Balthasar toquezquauhyotzin

Achitometl tlahtohuani culhuacan quichiuh ce ypiltzin ytoca
acxoquauhtli zan no tlahtohuani mochiuh yn culhuacan ynin quinchiuh
omentin ypilhuan ynic ce ytoca coxcoxtli, tlahtohuani culhuacan ynic
ome ytoca xihuitl temoc tlahtohuani culhuacan

Auh yn coxcoxtli tlahtohuani culhuacan oquinchiuh omentin ypilhuan
ynic ce ytoca huehue acamapichtli tlahtohuani culhuacan ynic ome ytoca
huehue tezozomoctli ynin amo momati campa yn tlahtocatito ynin
tlahtolli ytech oquiz yn bintula quimocahuilitiuh tlacatl catca Don
miguel sanchez ytzcactzin S. Sebastian atzaqualco chane catca





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Yntemoca yntlacamecayo, yn tlahtoque
yn teteuhctin yn ompa tlaca ypan altepetl culhuacan yhuan nican tlahtoque teteuhctin yn ipan in tlaca huey altepetl mexico tenochtitlan, by Domingo Francisco de San Antón Muñón Chimalpahin Cuauhtlehuanitzin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YNTEMOCA YNTLACAMECAYO ***

***** This file should be named 21802.txt or 21802.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/8/0/21802/

Produced by Anonymous

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
